What                   You Need to Know about
Economics to Be Happier
By
Víctor Saltero
								1
WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT ECONOMICS TO BE
HAPPIER
There are two subjects that should be taught to the world’s children before
they reach puberty. One is fluency of spoken expression, and the other is
economics, as both will be pivotal to their development in their future lives.
A high level of ability in language use opens a lot of doors because it
facilitates communication with others, allowing people to express their
thoughts, feelings and desires effectively. This in turn facilitates the
integration of young people into society; language unites us. I am sure that just
about everyone will agree with this idea.
However, in the case of economics, no doubt there will be less consensus. I
suspect that many readers will have furrowed their brows, wondering whether
to continue reading, because they believe economics is a boring subject for
specialists that ordinary people will never understand.
This impression is false. It is very easy to understand, and it is knowledge
that is extremely useful because your whole life, from cradle to grave—and
even afterwards—is affected by economics.
For example, social stability, which is so essential to your wellbeing, is the
product of a stable economy. When governments make bad decisions in this
area—or in any other area connected with it, such as the financial sector—they
can end up ruining a whole country, although the consequences of their acts
may take years to materialize, dragging you along with the disaster, and much
of your happiness with it.
An understanding of economics is essential because it will help us to make
better personal decisions. This knowledge will enable us to take the right
approach to buying a home or a car; it will give us the tools we need to
recognize the approach of a recession, so that we can take measures to
minimize its effects; it will help us to decide whether we should take out a
loan; and it will be very useful when we want to start up a business. And it
will even allow us to work out whether the politicians we’re going to vote for
are making feasible promises, or merely spouting populist nonsense that
would end up dragging society down and the wellbeing of our family with it.
A good knowledge of this subject gives us a clearer understanding of the
world we live in, as its principles are the same in every country; conversely,
without such knowledge we will walk through life blindly, with a greater risk
of stumbling and falling.
Perhaps the first question that needs to be answered is: if economics is so
								2

important, why isn’t it taught at school? The answer is simple: because
nobody—our politicians least of all—has the slightest interest in ensuring that
you know anything about this subject. They prefer to fill the curriculum with
subjects like history, which is manipulated in keeping with the interests of the
government of the day, or chemistry or math, which, beyond their basic rules,
will generally not have the slightest relevance to our children’s lives, and other
subjects that make no attempt to transmit useful knowledge, but only convey
the appearance of knowledge.
The political elite understand that a knowledge of economics would be a
threat to their power. That is why they are not especially keen on letting
citizens learn too much about it... not to mention the fact that they don’t know
much about it themselves because not even in the universities where this
science is studied do they teach it effectively. What is generally taught is the
particular jargon used in each economic sector: the financial sector, the
industrial sector, the trade sector, etc. In short, the particular features and
history of the different sectors, but no global understanding of the economy.
Indeed, we tend to take for granted that somebody who understands the
financial sector, for example, knows all about economics. This is a mistake.
The only knowledge that this person would usually have of this subject is how
to manage that part of the economy and the particular features of that specific
sector, but not how it interrelates with the rest. Nevertheless, we tend to
assume that they are experts in economics because we hear them use financial
jargon that we don’t understand, although they probably don’t know anything
more about economics than you do.
And how did they manage to keep you and your children so indifferent to
this subject? By creating a halo of complexity around it that it doesn’t have—
as will be shown below—and turning it into a boring and supposedly specialist
topic.
Without further ado, let’s take a closer look at the subject.
We’ll begin by defining exactly what economics is. Economics is simply
the science that studies every act of production and exchange of goods and
services to meet any kind of need or want that people may have.
It has always been around. Cavemen offered any surplus goods they had to
neighboring tribes in exchange for others they were short on. Such exchanges
were their way of trading, in an age before the invention of money when this
bartering process was the only means available to them. But it was a very
limited economic system, and would be quite useless today with more than six
billion people on the planet.
Money was invented more than 3,000 years ago, and since then economic
								3

concepts began evolving toward their current form.
Let’s move forward to our times.
In human nature there is a desire to possess things, which is born out of the
most powerful of our instincts: the survival instinct. This is why we buy food,
housing, clothing and all kinds of goods that become more numerous and
varied the more developed a society is, particularly as we move further beyond
the simple economics of survival. And it is precisely because of this instinct,
which is imprinted in the human brain, that every political and economic
philosophy that eliminates or restricts private property inevitably ends up
failing. Such a philosophy goes against our nature.
The phenomenon known as the economy comes into operation naturally
whenever somebody needs something he doesn’t have, because he will always
find somebody else ready to provide it. And this is how the different
specialized economic sectors come into being: production, transportation,
storage, sales; and, if necessary, financing. Coexisting simultaneously with
these different agents is the State, which becomes an economic sector of its
own by taking a percentage of this movement of goods and services in the
form of taxes.
These sectors are all mutually interdependent, and collectively they
constitute the economy.
As noted above, the economy comes into operation when someone seeks a
good or service, as this creates natural demand and that’s where it all begins.
To facilitate understanding, I have outlined a simple formula that explains
and regulates all the rules governing the economy, and that can be applied
universally.
The formula is: Demand = production + trade = labor.
And by extension: labor = more demand + more production + more trade =
more labor.
And so it goes on in an endless cycle.
Conversely, the absence of natural demand—a term I will make use of
repeatedly—has a negative impact on the other factors, resulting in
unemployment and poverty.
In short, when someone seeks something he wants (demand), somebody
else will provide it by making it and selling it to him, having to create
employment to produce what he has been asked for. These new workers will
also need and want goods which, in turn, others will provide, for which they
will also have to create work to meet this demand, and so on. But if demand is
cut, whatever the circumstances may be, unemployment and poverty will
								4

ensue.
This is what this Formula means, and therein lie all the principles of the
economy in a nutshell. The Formula also explains the reasons for the greatest
economic successes, and likewise, the biggest economic disasters of all time.
As will be shown below, these disasters are invariably the product of
erroneous decisions by certain professional sectors involved in the economy
that upset the harmonious balance of factors involved in the Formula.
Normally, they are mistaken decisions made by governments or by the
financial world, which are the two economic sectors with the biggest influence
on the economy, both for good and for ill.
The best way to explain this is to consider some real-life cases, which I
will offer below.
The reason for the economic (and, therefore, social) failure of Africa is that
there is no organized demand beyond what is necessary for mere survival; as a
result, there is minimal production, trade and labor.
The failure of the USSR was caused by two main factors: the prohibition
or restriction of private property, leaving its citizens without any motivation to
work; and the fact that the government decided what should be produced and
purchased—private companies were legally banned—and thus instead of
being governed by the natural demand of its citizens, the economy was
governed by the demand created and manipulated by the Soviet State, which
ended up collapsing with a resounding crash because it was producing tanks
and missiles in its factories when what the people wanted (natural demand)
was bread, milk, clothes, and housing. In other words, production was not
operating in harmony with demand. So the Soviet state fell apart after causing
its citizens a lot of suffering. Today North Korea is doing exactly the same
thing, and is headed in the same direction.
The Chinese learned from the Soviet failure and at once took to applying
the Formula described above, and with its effective implementation they have
turned their country into the world’s second biggest economic power.
The secret of the economic success of the United States lies in the vitality
of its natural and organized demand, which created and maintains a large
middle class, which is, in turn, what creates much of the demand on which
many of us around the world live.
As can be seen in these actual examples, in the negative cases the factors
of the Formula are upset by manipulation or absence of demand, while the
positive cases are the result of the effective application of that Formula.
In Africa, if there is no organized and natural demand, they cannot create
								5

employment that would in turn generate further demand and more
employment.
In the former USSR, the State directed and manipulated demand by
controlling industry, which only produced what the government instructed, not
what the citizens wanted. As a logical consequence, none of the factors of the
Formula could operate. In short, they were unable to get the economy running.
The United States, and now also China, have the largest middle classes in
the world because they create a free yet organized and natural demand. In
other words, both countries apply the Formula effectively, although sometimes
they also make mistakes that end up affecting all of us.
								6

THE ECONOMY OF ABUNDANCE, OR THE END OF POVERTY
The new economic context created by the Industrial Revolution, and the
abandonment of the gold standard as the benchmark for the production of
money, offers a number of possibilities that have yet to be fully developed,
because economic leaders have failed to recognize all the opportunities
presented by this new economic environment.
One of the fundamental features of the current economic model, which I
refer to here as the “abundance model”, is that there are no limits on the
production of wealth, which means that there should likewise be no limits on
job creation and, consequently, the elimination of poverty. Poverty has always
been and continues to be a product of what I call the “economy of scarcity”, as
I will explain below.
Until relatively recently (and in fact, in many parts of the world it is still
the case), the economy was based on a notion of insufficiency. Gold, which
was used as the monetary standard, tied the solvency and value of the
economy to this insufficiency. And the same was true of farming and mining,
which were the main sources of wealth until quite recently. As a consequence
of this economy based on limited resources, labor was obviously also limited.
This economy of scarcity has been what has governed human history since
the Stone Age. Indeed, the objective of most wars has been to seize the
resources of another tribe or nation. This limited system of scarcity was also
behind nearly all the economic crises of the past.
The last great traumatic manifestation of this was the Wall Street Crash of
1929, which precipitated the Great Depression. While the stock market crash
was really very important, what paralyzed the economy and led to a prolonged
worldwide depression was the drying up of demand that resulted from the
								7

erroneous economic measures taken by the US government at the time.
The US Federal Reserve itself helped to unleash the Great Depression
because it acted on the premise of scarcity after the stock market collapse by
restricting the flow of cash. This stifled the demand for goods because people
didn’t have money to buy them, which in turn triggered a rise in
unemployment. The price paid around the world for this mistake was huge,
and it even had a big influence on the outbreak of World War II, since the
increased hardship it brought about paved the way for the rise to power of a
populist lunatic like Hitler.
It is obvious that the political leaders and their advisors were acting in
accordance with the dictates of the economy of scarcity, and this is why it
never occurred to them that they should have done exactly the opposite of
what they did. In other words, instead of restricting cash, they should have
flooded the market with it, at low cost, in order to stimulate demand, which in
turn would boost production and employment. But the reality was that the
economic leaders never thought of such a possibility. The only solution they
saw was huge investments by the federal government, an approach that is
never effective because it increases taxes and public debt, and as a result, in
the medium term, leaves even less money in the hands of individuals and
businesses, reducing demand and increasing unemployment even more. Even
today some economists still praise the policy of big investments adopted by
the Roosevelt administration, crediting it with the end of the Great Depression.
This is totally erroneous. The end of the crisis, as ghastly as it may seem, was
brought about by the huge demand for all kinds of goods generated by World
War II, stimulating industry in the United States, which became the factory of
the world.
However, it was actually some time earlier that the first step was taken
toward the end of the economic model of scarcity. This step was the success of
the Industrial Revolution, although at the time nobody was aware of the fact. It
was at this time that consumer goods began being mass produced, goods that
could only be sold if there were a lot of people with purchasing power, which
meant that more people needed ready money. But this first step did not
dismantle the system of scarcity altogether, as in those days money continued
to be a limited resource. Nevertheless, it was a first step.
For a while, this evolved system of industrial production coexisted with the
traditional monetary system, which was still stuck in the same old straitjacket
of the gold standard for its production. As a result, goods were produced in
huge quantities, but the number of people with enough money to buy them did
not grow at the same rate.
This of course resulted in severe tensions that economists could not
								8

foresee, much less explain or resolve effectively. It was also at this time that
people like Karl Marx would cause considerable damage to mankind with
their theories, which were the product of sheer ignorance, as he completely
failed to grasp what this new age meant and the possibilities that it opened up
both for employers and for workers. These misguided theories were adopted
by many people around the world (indeed, some still espouse them today),
resulting in all kinds of suffering and social ills, including the Cold War.
It would thus not be until quite late in the last century (1971) that the new
economy would finally be born, as the product of the definitive elimination of
gold as the monetary standard in each country.
From that time on, the standard used would be the country’s gross
domestic product (GDP) and a series of other variables such as working
capital needs, inflation, etc. The brilliance of this new system is that there are
no longer any limits on the production of money than the ingenuity of a
country’s citizens to create wealth.
As a result, once the two elements of the Industrial Revolution and the
elimination of the gold standard were combined, the current economic model,
the economy of abundance, was born.
However, we have moved from the old economic model of scarcity to the
new model of abundance almost without realizing it. This is why the
possibilities and dimensions of the new model have yet to be fully understood
and exploited by our economic leaders and governments. This lack of
understanding has given rise to the poverty and economic crises that so
frequently afflict us, including the crisis of 2008.
As mentioned above, the key to the successful operation of this economic
model lies in the vitality of our society to create a demand for goods and
services in a natural and organized way, as this is what creates the employment
needed to meet that demand, which in turn gives rise to more natural demand,
and so on. This cycle is what should soon bring an end to miserliness, and
shortly thereafter to poverty.
However, it is important to note that the economy of abundance is being
implemented around the world in a highly irregular manner. In Africa, for
example, there is no sign of it, as the economy of scarcity continues to prevail.
Its economy is very primitive, tribal and disorganized. In most Latin American
countries, the implications of the new scenario have not been properly grasped
either, as they have only just begun learning how to implement it. Many other
countries, such as India or Russia, have yet to develop it very effectively. In all
these cases, the new model will be implemented actively when their leaders
have a proper understanding of it, as only then will they recognize the
possibilities it offers their citizens and the governments themselves, which will
								9

be able to collect more money as the GDP rises, without having to raise taxes.
In Western Europe, this economic model of abundance is being fully
applied, although the activity of their bloated, interventionist governments
undermines its effects, resulting in chronically high unemployment levels on
the Old Continent. By keeping taxes excessively high, governments are
siphoning money out of the market and reducing the purchasing power of their
citizens, resulting in a reduction in demand as well. This in turn increases
unemployment.
In China, the new model is being implemented effectively, with the
peculiarity that a single party holds all political power. This ensures a very
positive level of stability today, but promises upheavals in the future when the
new generations of the bourgeoisie and middle class demand a share of that
power. We must hope that intelligence prevails and the transition is smooth
and balanced.
In the United States, this economic model has been fully implemented, and
as government intervention is limited the country doesn’t suffer from the
unemployment problems that afflict Europe.
The United States, which is the country with the biggest share of the global
economy, is a special case because its population is made up of a mixture of
races and cultures whose interbreeding enriches the country, resulting in a
dynamic and creative society that is the product of natural selection, due to the
fact that many of the most energetic individuals from other countries have
immigrated to this country.
These characteristics, along with its principle of freedom, facilitate wildly
imaginative initiatives resulting in the creation of profuse and widespread
wealth that translates into millions of jobs and a strong middle class. But this
creative imagination when applied to the financial sector has at times led to
excesses, with some peculiar outcomes that pose significant risks. Thus, the
occasional economic problems suffered in this country tend to be the product
of misguided actions on the part of its financial sector, which also affect the
rest of the world.
It is undeniable that the financial sector is extremely useful to society
because it serves as a channel for the flow of cash, but it is for this very reason
that turmoil in this sector, with its decisive influence on the economy as a
whole, can sometimes have catastrophic consequences. This is why it should
be a key role of governments especially to regulate and control this sector in
order to prevent the damaging effects of any excesses, as occurred in 2008.
The United States should lead the way in this regulation, which could
begin by re-establishing clearly defined boundaries between commercial and
								10

investment banking.
Commercial banks should continue to have the backing of the central
banks (as they have always done) to guarantee deposits and provide them with
liquid assets when necessary. This banking sector should provide the market
with secured loans, taking care that such loans never exceed the value (or
useful life) of the asset for which the loan is granted. The sector should be
prohibited from participating in high-risk transactions, such as the purchase of
“derivatives”, as these are generally nothing more than a mix of different
financial products with different degrees of vulnerability, which are bought
and sold frenetically with big risks, because buyers almost never know what it
really is they are buying. No such transactions should be on the books of
commercial banks because they pose a danger to the reliability of the system.
The profits of these institutions will of course always be moderate, but as they
do not participate in high-risk transactions they will be very stable.
In the case of investment banks or similar institutions, what is most
urgently needed is for users and customers to be clearly aware (and this should
also be the job of the governments) that unlike commercial banks they are not
protected by the central bank, and that although with imagination and luck
investors may earn large sums of money with such banks, they must also be
aware that they could lose everything, because neither taxpayers’ money nor
the commercial banks (which should not be involved in the investment sector)
will come to their rescue if difficulties arise.
It is also important to learn from recent history and to correct mistakes
where necessary, because crises like the one in 2008 have demonstrated that
the risk insurance that banks purchased through insurers was a mere fiction.
This operates as follows: the financial institution makes a purchase, for
example, of a large package of mortgages from another institution. It then
insures against potential losses or defaults through an insurance company, and
thereby theoretically eliminates the risk from its balance sheets, allowing it to
seek new loans secured by the insurance and continue investing. This in reality
is no more than an accounting sleight of hand that conceals the danger; the risk
is still there, because when the borrowers default, the insurers are unable to
cover their debts as the costs are too great. The defaults thus end up affecting
the financial institution, which suddenly has losses on its books, and this in
turn causes panic among its creditors and depositors, who perceive a threat to
the savings they have invested with the company and rush in a stampede to try
to withdraw as much as they can.
The social role of financial institutions and the banking sector is to channel
credit and savings in a stable and efficient manner. But to be able to apply the
economy of abundance with all its potential for development, these dangers
posed by the financial sector outlined here need to be corrected as quickly as
								11

possible in the interests of protecting us from future global crises.
Another area for improvement relates to a lack of global homogeneity.
Currently, each country applies its own criteria to the accounting control
systems of major companies listed on the stock exchange. The globalized
context in which money moves around makes it advisable for the
measurement and control methods used by these companies to be the same
everywhere, but this is not happening. This abnormality poses additional risks,
as I will explain below. In the US accounting system, the financial assets of
American companies have to be updated regularly, to reflect increases and
decreases on their books that translate into profits and losses.
In Europe, most countries do not operate this way. The companies listed on
the stock market only adjust the value of their assets on their books when they
unload them. Thus, when difficulties are foreseen due to a drop in value of
such assets on the market, the company’s directors will determine not to sell
them in order to avoid the appearance of losses on their balance sheets.
Clearly, the US accounting system is more transparent, but the European
system is more secure in that it prevents major shocks, as its accounting
method keeps companies from having to speak of losses (which always has a
potential for causing panic among investors), resorting instead to euphemisms
like “cash shortage”, “liquidity problems”, etc.
In any case, a consensus should be reached on one or the other method by
the governments of the world’s major economies, adopting a single global
accounting system for any company listed on the stock exchange, especially
those operating in the financial sector. The economic authorities of every
nation need to acknowledge once and for all that the financial sector is
globalized, and therefore needs global rules to minimize risks.
Another worthwhile step would be to return the stock market to its original
role of financing new projects and maintaining existing ones, and reducing the
predominance of “short-termists”, who sometimes take big risks (and obtain
big profits) that can even push companies into bankruptcy. This should be
regulated and controlled by agreements between governments and the
financial sector, in order to prevent these highly destabilizing practices of the
virtual economy.
There are many other steps to take, but one of the most important for
preventing future risks is to introduce instruction in the basics of economics in
schools so that young people have a better understanding of this subject, as it
will affect them their whole lives much more than other subjects they are
studying.
In conclusion, we are living in an exciting age, the age of the economy of
								12

abundance, and if we are able to predict and prevent the risks it poses, we may
find ourselves in the first era of human history in which poverty is no longer
an insoluble problem, as it can be solved with the possibilities that this
economic model offers for the creation of hundreds of millions of jobs around
the world, once all nations learn how to apply it and abandon the practices and
mentalities, still prevailing in many places, of the economy of scarcity.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT ECONOMICS
Below is a list of the questions I have been asked most often in recent
times on this subject, although I have already answered some of them in other
written works.
What caused the global financial crisis of 2008?
At the end of the last century there were two basic types of institutions in
the financial sector: traditional banks and investment banks. Both are to
money what a riverbed is to water. If you make changes to the riverbed that
aren’t well planned, you may cause the river to dry up or, conversely, to
overflow. In the case of this crisis, poor decisions resulted in an initial
overflow of money that led to a subsequent monetary drought. These decisions
dried up credit, which in turn dried up demand.
Why did this happen? The role of traditional banks was to act as a
depository of the people’s money and, with a profit margin from interest, to
loan it to anyone who needed it with the due guarantees, since it was other
people’s money they were lending. The central banks of each country
supposedly supervised these banks to ensure they didn’t do anything
outlandish that would put the money of their depositors at risk.
Meanwhile, investment banks sought capital from others and invested it in
high-risk transactions, with the aim of increasing profits for their clients, and
for themselves, if these transactions proved successful. These banks were,
along with pension funds, the big investors in stock markets around the world.
Then, at the end of the 1990s, US President Clinton lifted the restrictions
on traditional banks related to stock market investment, while allowing other
financial institutions to act as traditional banks as well. Many other countries
imitated this initiative.
The result was a massive injection of money into stock markets around the
world, thereby creating artificial demand. Thus began a problem whose
consequences would be felt years later.
								13

At the beginning of this century, banks and financial institutions began
granting huge loan packages, mostly for housing but also to purchase other
goods. They gave out more loans than businesses and the public needed for
their usual demand, and these loans encouraged people to spend beyond the
real possibilities of return.
The financial sector was delighted because, on paper, it was making a lot
of money. With these theoretical profits it distributed generous dividends to its
stakeholders. As will be shown below, these lavish profits led to huge losses,
which we all ended up having to pay for.
The lending institutions had already granted loans to people who were able
to pay it back, so they began lowering the requirements in order to provide
loans to less solvent borrowers.
The borrowers receiving this money assumed that the experts knew what
they were doing, and thought: If the banks are prepared to give me money, it
must be because I can afford it. So they bought bigger houses or new cars they
neither needed nor were really able to pay for.
The banks and financial institutions knew that these were high-risk
mortgages and lending operations. And so to control this risk, they took out
default insurance with various insurers (especially with the company AIG). If
someone defaulted on a mortgage or a loan, these insurers would have to cover
the cost. In this way, the banks wrote off their risks and were able to seek new
loans to continue operating, and as a result they went further and further into
debt. The insurers assumed this risk on a global scale, convinced that the
housing market would continue to boom.
But this conviction was far from logical. Having inflated demand with so
much credit, housing prices ended up falling due to a supply surplus because
too much housing had been built; more than what people needed. Mortgages
were foreclosed and the insurers had to pay for the defaults. All of them, all
over the world, and at the same time. They couldn’t pay. So the banks took
massive losses all on the same day, because responsibility for the defaults
ultimately fell to them, and as a result they went under and took the financial
system with them.
These were the reasons for the financial crisis that began in 2008, the
consequences of which are still being felt today in many countries.
As you can see, it was a flagrant violation of the Formula outlined above,
as it created fictitious (and therefore not natural) demand, as a result of the
excessive credit. This produced a bubble that came close to bringing down the
global economy.
Financial institutions, with the support of governments, were the ones that
								14

created this disaster, because while credit has the capacity to build a modern
economy, a lack of credit has the power to destroy it swiftly and completely,
which is what inevitably happens when people are unable to get loans to buy a
house, start a business, fill store shelves, or buy a car. In short, without credit,
demand dries up and this undermines the other factors of the Formula:
production, trade and labor. And the excessive credit initially gives rise to
excessive consumption, which inevitably leads to a monetary drought.
The banks were left in a disastrous state of insolvency, with massive debts,
and ceased to fulfill their social role, which is to be the channel for the flow of
cash; they held up the circulation of money while they licked their wounds.
They pushed the world to the brink of collapse, as all this happened very
fast. The situation stabilized very slowly, through huge injections of money
taken from public taxes into banks around the world. But we must not forget
that this crisis could happen again unless governments and central banks
impose sufficient controls on financial institutions.
In short, as can be seen, the key to this crisis was a severe manipulation of
demand, which was no longer natural.
What is money?
It is one of man’s most brilliant creations, because without it we would
never be able to feed the billions of inhabitants of the world today.
First of all, it is worth clarifying that money is nothing more than a simple
convention. Its solidity depends on the confidence that its holder needs to have
that he will be able to exchange this piece of metal or paper in his hands for
goods in the country that issued that currency.
Money was born out of a need for individuals and societies to have an
effective instrument for exchanging goods.
In the most ancient times, in societies much simpler than ours, these
transactions were limited to the mere exchange of merchandise between
individuals. Thus, for example, a man in possession of a wheat surplus would
seek to exchange it for animal hides for clothing from a man who produced
more than he needed. Probably this was how the art of haggling was born, an
art still practiced in many parts of the world, because it must have been
difficult to determine, for example, how much wheat should be given in
exchange for a sheepskin. It would be reasonable to assume that these
transactions would have been sealed after long nights of discussions that no
doubt would have been enjoyable in themselves.
Things started to get complicated when, as a consequence of demographic
growth and production specialization, it became harder to make significant
								15

trading deals and compare prices and values, which represented an obvious
obstacle to large-scale trade. This problem was resolved with the ingenious
invention of what we know today as money. Once it appeared, trade expanded
quickly, since it facilitated the exchange of goods both between individuals
and between communities.
In the beginning, in the absence of a monetary system, trade was
conducted using chickens, cows or pigs as units of reference. In fact, the first
Roman coins minted bore images of these animals and received the name of
"pecunia", a term derived from "pecus", which in Latin means "livestock".
But what is money, really? As I mentioned above, it is a convention, an
unwritten agreement, as physically it is generally just a piece of metal or paper
of barely any value in itself.
Without attempting to offer an analysis of its evolution throughout history,
I will point out a few important points that will hopefully shed some light on
what it is.
Until a short time ago, all the money placed in circulation in a country
corresponded to the total value of the gold reserves held in the national bank.
This was what is known as the economy of scarcity. This system lasted from
ancient times right up to our days. Money was thus a kind of check to bearer,
payable immediately, issued by the State, which the holder expects to be able
to exchange in gold or equivalent goods at the value specified. For example, if
the Bank of France had 100 tons of gold in its coffers, it would produce and
circulate coins and bills equal to that total value; its division into smaller units
gave rise to what has come to be known as national currency, to which each
country gave its own name. This meant that the value of any currency in
circulation was guaranteed by the equivalent proportion of gold deposited in
the State Bank. In some cases, the coins were even produced directly in gold
or silver, and thereby acquired value in themselves.
This system—the gold standard—fell into disuse once and for all late in
the last century (in 1971) as a consequence of the deflationary crisis of 1929.
It was replaced by a complex system directed mainly by the central banks of
each country, with varying degrees of independence from their respective
governments, in which various factors are taken into account to determine the
amount of money that should be placed in circulation: Gross domestic product
(GDP), the currency needs of companies, individuals and States, balances of
payments, inflation, etc.
This new system has resulted in what is called the economy of abundance
because its implementation makes it possible to increase the number of people
with a reasonable standard of living continuously, as there are no limits on the
production of money other than the imagination and hard work of individuals
								16

to create wealth.
What is the stock market?
The stock market began as a source of financing for companies, in addition
to or instead of traditional loans. Over time, it has turned into a mechanism for
facilitating public access to companies, as it allows any citizen to purchase a
share in them for a little money.
Companies that need a capital injection to be able to take on new projects
or to stabilize the ones they are developing have the opportunity to obtain it
from individuals or entities who entrust their savings to them and who, by
doing so, become shareholders.
The main advantage of companies listed on the stock exchange is, in
addition to obtaining financing, they don't pay interest for the money they
receive, as they would have to in the case of loans. The shareholder or
investor, meanwhile, becomes a co-owner of the company, and is therefore
subject to its financial fate. In other words, if the company in which he has
bought shares earns profits, part of those profits will go to him, always in
accordance with the percentage of his share. On the other hand, if the
company takes losses, the shareholder could end up losing all the capital he
invested in it
As noted above, this source of financing has played a key role in the
growth of companies in recent decades and has made their ownership public,
because there are millions of small investors around the world who use their
savings to buy shares on the stock market. These investments are known as
risk capital, because if the company takes a loss, its shares drop in value and
part of their savings may be lost; but if it earns profits, the investor can have a
share in them and his share value may increase.
However, shares have a subjective value, which takes on increasing
importance every day thanks to supply and demand. If there is a lot of demand
for certain shares—more potential buyers than sellers—their price will rise; in
most cases, this is due more to the herd mentality of buyers than the income
statements of the companies concerned. Conversely, shares fall when the
number of buyers—or the amount of buyer money—is lower than the offer of
shares made at a particular price.
This behavior has made speculative transactions so significant in recent
years that shares in companies facing an unstable financial situation can end
up being overvalued while others in a healthy condition can be undervalued.
Consequently, with the passage of time, the stock market has lost its
usefulness as a gage of the state of health of a country's economy.
The problem lies in the fact that the means have been confused with the
								17

ends. The original purpose of the stock market as a source of financing for
business projects has been obscured by the mere speculative game of chasing a
quick profit. These days, hardly anybody trusts their savings to the same
shares for any length of time to reap a company's profits when its projects are
successful. In the current reality, investors on the stock market buy and sell
shares compulsively, looking for a quick profit from the speculative rise or fall
of the shares they are trading. In other words, the stock market has basically
turned into something like a virtual business which, in most cases, does not
generate any collective wealth at all.
It would be interesting to consider returning the stock market to its roots,
especially after the globalization of finance, since this has meant that
speculative transactions in New York, for example, influence and endanger the
savings of millions of investors around the world who have neither the
information nor the training necessary to have any control over what they
invest.
What should the role of the State be in the economy?
The role of the State in a modern economy should be as a regulator of the
economic sectors that participate in it, creating laws that are sensible and
agreed on with the sectors concerned. It should also perform two other
essential roles: as an arbitrator in the resolution of any conflicts that may arise,
and as a careful monitor of strict compliance with the rules by the different
economic sectors, especially the financial sector, in view of its huge influence.
But what the State should never be—except in very limited strategic cases
of obvious public interest—is an entrepreneur, as it doesn’t know how to do it.
Every time a State has turned into an entrepreneur, in the medium term it has
ended up plunging the citizens of its country into poverty.
Moreover, it is important to understand that the State does not create
wealth or employment. When a government hires officials it isn’t creating
employment; it is creating expenditure. The reason that this is so—returning to
the Formula—is because most government officials perform activities that
have not arisen from any natural demand of the public, but from a decision by
the politicians in power at that moment. In other words, they are not
producing anything that has been requested or demanded by the community.
It is undeniable that for the State to be able to provide the services for
which it exists (security, public works, justice, etc.), it has to collect taxes from
the citizens and employ officials to carry out these obligations. But it should
do so with the utmost prudence, because an increase in government officials
has the inevitable consequence of increasing sterile bureaucratic costs, and
with it the obligation of increasing taxes, which leads to a reduction in demand
because there is less money available to citizens and, as a result, there would
								18

be a foreseeable increase in unemployment in the medium term.
However, according to current political mentalities, it is unacceptable that
one part of society should have to live in poverty, which is why today’s
governments, when spending the money received from their citizens in the
form of taxes, have to provide funds to help the weakest members of society.
But they should also manage this money very prudently, because if the number
of aid recipients increases, the government will have to increase costs to
support them (and to keep their votes in the process), and this can only be
done by either increasing taxes or going into debt, which will create more
poverty, leading into a perverse economic circle that can only end by
bankrupting us all. Governments must ensure that the burden of the subsidized
classes does not impoverish the active workforce, who are the ones who keep
the country going.
The best way that governments can really help society’s weakest members
is by contributing to the creation of employment, and the best way they can do
this is by removing barriers to business creation and encouraging
entrepreneurs. This can be achieved by providing social stability, rules of play
that are sensible and generally agreed on, and legal certainty.
Is consumerism negative?
There is a highly significant anecdote that is in a way related to this
question. Mario Soares (the leader of the Socialist Party in Portugal) had just
won the elections in his country when he received a congratulatory phone call
from his Swedish counterpart, Olof Palme (also a socialist).
In this conversation, Soares said to Palme: “In two years I will have gotten
rid of all the rich people in Portugal.” To which the Swede replied: “I don’t
want to get rid of the rich, my plan is to get rid of the poor.”
Of course, Palme was right. The problem is not that there are rich people,
but that there are poor people. The fact that many people spend huge sums of
money on eccentric consumer products is not negative, if they can afford it.
Why does anyone need a Ferrari, a hundred pairs of shoes, or a private
airplane? The obvious answer is nobody, as they are not a vital necessity,
offering nothing more than the vain pleasure of being able to show them off.
But in buying such goods these rich people have paid taxes and created
employment. In reality, they have generated demand for something worth a lot
of money, which then turns into labor.
On the opposite extreme—and socially much more favorably viewed than
the above example—is the citizen who has only two suits: one to wear and the
other to wash, and brags about not needing more. Such stoicism is
intellectually satisfying, but unfortunately it contributes nothing to society, and
								19

does not help create work for others.
But that being said, it is worth clarifying the following: Consumption is
negative—and in this case it is appropriate to use the pejorative term
“consumerism” for it—when it is financed by loans that cannot be paid back,
or with maturity periods that are longer than the average useful life of the
product financed. Such behavior can certainly be classified using the
pejorative sense of the term. When this happens—for example, financing the
purchase of a car over twenty years, longer than the useful life of the vehicle
—all we are doing is creating excess demand today, and inflation with it, in
exchange for a lack of demand tomorrow due to saturation of the market, and
then we will be brewing an employment crisis for the future.
In economics, is there truth in the perception that if someone has a lot,
someone else must go without?
This widespread assumption arose by default as a result of the type of
economy that predominated throughout human history until relatively recently.
This economy was based on mining operations, with gold as the monetary
standard: all of them goods in short supply. It therefore seemed obvious that if
some had a lot, others must have to go without.
But the Industrial Revolution, and then in the last century the abandonment
of the gold standard, brought an end to the economic system of scarcity, giving
way to the current system based on an economy of abundance, which rendered
this assumption erroneous.
In the modern economy, as noted above, there are no limits on the creation
of wealth other than the imagination and effort that people are prepared to
exert within a regulated system, in accordance with the terms of the Formula
described above. This means that we all could have “a lot”, regardless of how
much others possess.
The economy of today has completely changed the obsolete principles of
scarcity, with its notion that “if someone has a lot someone else must do
without”, although many politicians still successfully exploit this propaganda
as a populist weapon in order to win power.
Today, the money placed in circulation in a country is related to the GDP
of that country, which means that the only limit is the capacity of that
country’s citizens to create wealth. This means that the more goods produced
by a country that the markets want to buy, the more the GDP will rise, and
with it the money in circulation and the incomes of all its citizens.
Why is Venezuela, in spite of all the oil it has, in such a terrible economic
state?
								20

Indeed, this beautiful country has been plunged into an intense drama, in
which poverty has taken over the daily lives of its people.
I will offer a quick overview of its recent history so that the origins of
these serious problems may be better understood.
In the last century, Venezuela had a theoretically democratic two-party
system for decades, characterized more than anything by corruption. Lusinchi,
Caldera, Pérez and other leaders drove the country to bankruptcy, and this led
to social upheaval. Out of this upheaval emerged Hugo Chávez, a man with a
military background, who came to power promising to clean things up and
bring an end to the chaos.
But he didn’t know how to do it, nor has his successor, Maduro. Both
leaders governed in ignorance, just as those before them had governed in
corruption. It was out of such ignorance that they nationalized the country’s
most important companies, and they have simply had no idea how to manage
them efficiently. The result of this has been even more poverty than there was
in the days of the corrupt rulers. This has only meant more suffering for the
Venezuelan people, because demagogic slogans and incendiary speeches like
those of the current government, blaming everyone else for its ills, will not
solve anything at all.
From an economic standpoint, it is worth noting that Venezuela has one of
the largest oil reserves in the world, as well as other important natural
reserves, which, if managed effectively, would be able to lift its people out of
the situation they currently find themselves in.
To do this they will need to find competent rulers who can apply the
formula outlined above with integrity and diligence, beginning by restoring
civil peace.
If they can achieve this, a great future lies ahead for them.
How would secession from Spain affect the people of Catalonia?
While sailing on the Mediterranean recently, we saw a group of dolphins
swimming harmoniously near our boat. It was a beautiful sight. With us was a
marine biologist, who explained that they were pilot whale dolphins, and that
they possessed some curious characteristics. One of these was that they always
followed a leader, and when that leader became ill or lost its sense of
direction, it would swim for the shore where it would beach and, inevitably,
die. What is curious is that the other dolphins would follow it to the end and
die beached on the shore with their leader.
The Catalan situation reminds me of these dolphins. A few political leaders
are leading Catalonia to the shore, and a segment of the Catalan people are
								21

following them, just like the dolphins following their disorientated leader.
Catalonia has been politically structured as a part of Spain practically since
its origins, and it has a strong middle class with a very reasonable standard of
living. Nevertheless, some of its political leaders want to drag it toward the
creation of an independent state, and some of its citizens are following them.
If this secession were to take place, they would be creating a new,
independent country, and under existing laws that country would not be part of
the European Union, and would obviously be out of the eurozone. They would
have to create their own currency, which would have no value outside
Catalonia. This is irrefutable, however much ignorant flag-waving fanatics
may wish to deny it.
But continuing with the secessionist hypothesis, it is easy to foresee that as
the date of secession drew near, Catalan banks would not have a single euro or
dollar left in their coffers, because nearly everybody would start withdrawing
them when they rightly guessed that the new government would convert them
all by decree into Catalan currency, which, beyond their borders, would be
worth no more than Monopoly money.
Obviously, the citizens would receive their salaries in this new currency,
but they would have to pay for all kinds of imported goods in dollars or euros,
which they would have to buy at exorbitant prices, and this would result in a
sudden spike in the costs of all imported products and, inevitably, runaway
price increases in normal consumer goods, dragging the purchasing power of
the new nation’s citizens down, and increasing poverty at the same rate.
On the other hand, market needs would require any company of a
reasonable size based in Catalonia to leave the country just to survive, and this
would drive all its subsidiary companies, employees, etc., to bankruptcy.
These are not opinions. They are no less than the precise application of
basic economic principles, combined with international law. These
consequences are inevitable, and once again we can see the need for people to
receive an economic education, as it would enable them to understand the
formidable dangers they are taking on.
And what about you? Doesn’t this direction being taken by the Catalan
people remind you of the pilot whale dolphins?

Víctor Saltero
								22
